Well, I was talking to Dr. Robert Belly.
Now, do you, do people call you doctor or commander?
How do you like that?
Well, Bob.
I'm used to Bob.
In fact, I did the CNN yesterday, and they kept referring to me as commander, and that's been so long since I've been referred to by my military.
It's nice.
You know, it's nice.
It just caught me off guard.
Oh, I know I left as a lieutenant.
Did you leave active duty as— I left as active duty as a lieutenant and then I resigned.
And then I was brought back in because I had to be an officer to be involved in certain projects.
I couldn't be a civilian.
Yeah, yeah.
And my recollection of that, I was still an undergraduate in college when I was 63, I guess.
64, yeah.
63, 64.
And the perception always was that it just, I mean... Down it went, right.
It just went down and they were in a dive.
Yeah, it didn't come out.
It didn't come out, but the way we constructed that.
Pretty terrifying, isn't it?
Pretty amazing, yeah.
A whole sequence of events.
And this was all reconstructed by communications?
By communications plus the implosion records.
They could hear it break up.
And they could reconstruct that.
Same with the scorpion.
And then obviously the extensive amount of diving we did on it.
I photographed every square inch of it.
I documented every square inch of it.
You know, just by contrast, the enthusiasm that you have for this, I can compare this interview, I've done several with him, but just recently with Carl Sagan.
Oh, yeah.
Because he's sick, I just read.
I hope not.
I just read that he has a bone marrow disease.
Oh, jeez.
This is in the paper yesterday.
How do you see it?
Yeah.
Yeah, I met him once.
I met him once briefly at a hotel.
I mean, like...
He chatted for seconds in the lobby, and that was him.
But the reason I raise it is the enthusiasm he has.
Because there's only once in the history of human history, only one opportunity where you can be present at whatever, you know, whether you make contact with the moon or walk on the moon.
And there's a quote that you've made a number of times.
Yeah, we know more about the far side of the moon or the bottom of the ocean.
We know about the ocean.
Well, and the ocean is so important to us.
And it's going to become even more so.
I mean, there are more people alive today than have died during the entire history of the human race.
And we're going to double that in eight years.
We're not going to live in space right away.
We're not going to live on the moon.
We're not going to live on Mars for a couple generations, if ever.
And yet there's this incredible ignorance about the ocean by...
We don't live on 18 percent of the Earth, 19 percent.
And we have no choice but to move out onto the ocean and into the ocean.
That's right.
You perceive this?
Yeah, I don't think we're going to live down the abyss and turn on the light bulb.
But I do see us living out on the ocean.
I see the migration of people out into that living space, particularly since there's some really clever technologies that are coming along that make it inexpensive, safe, and comfortable.
And that's the whole thing.
spar buoy concept where if you take a pencil and you put a little piece of lead on it, put it in a bathtub, you can't excite it, it won't move.
If you throw waves at it, it only moves one tenth of the wave that goes by it.
So I see vertical condominiums that are half in, half out of the water where you can get the best of both worlds.
Not far.
Just out.
You don't have to go very far before you get over the curvature of the earth and it's all gone.
My concern is that I know that when we have fall weather coming and there are hurricanes— You're winched down.
Well, you take the ship out.
You leave port, though, too.
You get out of here.
You would just winch down.
You'd have these things in a few hundred feet of water, enough to be below the surge, and you'd just winch it down.
When you talk about the vastness of the ocean and how little is known and how—
The vast proponents have never been seen.
Seen.
Mostly the Southern Hemisphere.
Yeah.
It's always a sense of, I mean, it's not just discovery.
No, no.
It's, you really, I mean, you apparently have a lot of moments, I guess, to savor, when you say, gee.
Well, it's just, yeah, what's also interesting about the deep sea is that it's intimate, despite its size.
Everything...
appears at about 30 feet everything appears at about 30 feet it's a living room sort of uh all of a sudden the titanic pops into view at 30 feet all of a sudden these exotic creatures just pop into view like this veil is lifted and and things can happen right around you like the doll set going by your window and it's
You just recoil and crack your head.
It's almost like an opening image in a photographic bath, which appears gradually, and there's a sense of a growing expectation.
It snaps.
It pops.
And it's sort of like poltergeist.
It's right behind that door.
You want to open the door, but you're also nervous of it.
When you're making a dive, like when we crashed into the bottom, it just pops into view, and then it hits you.
Or a shark just suddenly is there.
Or a swordfish is suddenly in your face.
So there's these moments of serenity punctuated by sheer terror.
It's fascinating.
You're also three-dimensional.
You're no longer this biped.
You fly.
And your motions are like this.
And so you have this sense of flight.
that you don't have walking around on land.
Because of buoyancy you can fly.
I did an interview a number of years ago with Buzz Alton, I guess who was... Right, Malcolm was the co-opter with him.
That's right, a collaborator or whatever it is.
I just wanted to articulate for me what it was like to be standing in this place.
And it's like a typical test pilot.
I don't have time for that stuff.
Well, you do.
But I'm wondering if there's this enthusiasm that I sense with you.
There's always two people inside of you.
There's a professional and there's a human.
And at times, elements are drawing purely upon your professional skill sets and you're almost animatronic.
You're almost robotic.
But there's a lot of moments.
when you aren't being called upon, your skill set isn't being called upon, and you can just, it sinks in what you're doing.
I'm sure a heart surgeon who was the first to remove a human's heart, and there was this moment when you looked down and there was this hollow chest with nothing in it.
And then he took this other heart and put it in.
There has to have been a moment where he went, oh my God, Jesus.
What am I serious?
I don't know what I'm doing.
You know, and there are those moments when you just sit there, because the ocean, everything moves in slow motion.
I mean, you still, on today's fastest oceanographic ship, go 15 miles an hour.
When you're down underwater, you're moving at less than a mile an hour.
you are you're not even walking speed you're slower than walking and so everything sort of it's like slow motion and so you have plenty of time to be reactive I'm sure when he was on the moon there had to have been moments when he was about to go to sleep when he went oh my god I'm on the moon I did that when I was sitting on the deck of the Titanic I mean
You know, we went through the whole landing procedure, which we were nervous about, because we didn't know if the deck was strong.
I had no idea, you know.
Three-quarters of the century, you had no idea if it went through it.
Sure.
As soon as you landed, so I can remember the pilot and myself were... Yeah, yeah, just a little more, a little more, and you're going through this whole landing process, like you're landing on the moon, and then you go clank, clank, and then you took on a ten-degree lift to the ship.
As soon as you landed, you went clunk, clunk.
So, what was the feeling then?
Well, it was like, oh my God.
I mean, you were almost whispering.
Because it was just… And you just looked out the window.
Just look at a bug crawling across the deck.
Did you expect to find any remains?
No.
I knew that from the Thresh and the Scorpion, which was fresher than ever.
And it is interesting that... You have shoes.
You have shoes in all these cases.
All of them.
On every ship we've ever... Well, when you come across them like that, just like that, and you just imagine humans, and you look up and you see the belt,
Or a wristwatch fan.
Or a hat fan.
And that stuff was all over you.
All that?
A satchel sitting there.
The other people picked up.
I thought that was pretty tasteless.
How do you feel about that?
You don't mind our going for a month jumping around?
No, I— I mean, you must have known, certainly— I couldn't have believed— That they were going to pinpoint where you were.
Well, they were with me.
They wrote down the coordinates.
The French.
I didn't expect them to loot the ship, because that was an act of a government.
I didn't expect the French government to do that, what they did.
Jean-Louis Michel said at the time that France will never, never disturb their sight.
Well, he was wrong.
So I was surprised that it happened that quickly the next year.
that they would do it.
That they would do it.
I mean, why?
A government.
What are they going to get out of it?
They've got more beautiful art in the Louvre.
What does France need to get involved with picking up pots and pans?
I think there just was a something in the French culture, something in their psychic that I missed.
Were you deceived?
No, I think
I don't think I was deceived.
That could have even used a stronger word, too, I think.
No, no, Jean-Louis couldn't speak for the French government.
I mean, Jean-Louis felt what he felt and said what he said and never took anything himself.
No, I think he as a human being was—I think what happened was the people that were involved, it got removed from their feelings to an abstract bureaucrat in Paris who said, we can make some money.
Maybe.
It's pretty expensive to get out of here.
Well, they got their money back.
Americans actually paid the bill.
The first group was that group that did Geraldo Rivera's opening of Autophon State.
That was disgusting.
So that was pretty bad.
That was just pretty tasteless.
But that's why I haven't given out locations of any of the other ships.
I've never published a location of Bismarck.
I offered it to the German government.
They said, that's fine.
Didn't want it.
Why?
I don't think they wanted the responsibility of knowing.
The only government that has sought me out for a coordinate was the Australian government, after I found the Canberra in Guadalcanal in Arabunnam Sound.
They're the only country that came to me and said, could we have the coordinates?
How the hell do you find these things and they can't?
They don't look.
They could if they wanted to.
You know, explorers are explorers, and they do things that other people don't do.
They're motivated by a whole different set of motivations, whereas governments don't explore, really.
They may take advantage of what an explorer does, like Spain and Columbus.
I mean, Columbus got thrown in a slammer when he came home.
He got thrown in jail.
So I've never looked at—the only people that seemed to really explore in the time—well, I guess the Portuguese didn't manage to, too, but the English were very good about it.
Captain Cook, who was one of my heroes.
There's a new biography of him.
I was just, I tried to go to where he died, and I couldn't get to it.
It's at the very end, but you know what it makes?
Again, I didn't realize this.
William Bly, every book you read, he turns up in every damn book he read.
He was involved in that.
He was a hell of a navigator.
Spectacular.
Incredible navigator.
What a hunter.
He opens fire, loads the guns with balls instead of shot him.
He's shooting to kill him.
He was thirty-six hundred miles in an open boat.
Amazing.
Amazing speed.
I mean, you have to take your hat off to him.
That's spectacular.
He sort of reminds you of the Tasmanian Devil.
He's the only guy you can pick on who accepted the indignity of a mutiny boat at sea and on land.
He wouldn't have killed himself.
And then he had some mutiny over in Australia.
He had the colony over.
He was a scourge.
But Cook was a wonderful guy.
I mean, he was, he died on the Big Island on the Kona Coast.
And I tried, I drove down, I was there doing this thing for children, the Jason Project, just last month.
And my wife said, well, what do you want?
I said, I want to go where Captain Cook died.
And I just want to go there.
Just want to go there.
So we drove all over the place to get there.
And we drove down, and they're not real proud of it.
They shouldn't be.
There's not a lot of signs.
There's not, you say, well, where was Captain, who?
Well, you know, Captain Cook, the world's greatest explorer, was... I don't know.
I don't know anything about it.
And so finally I got down to this little end of the road, and they were selling some soda, and really, a woman was selling homemade cookies and stuff like that.
And I looked out in the water, and across the way, across the bay, was this memorial.
But you can't get to it unless you swim or go by boat.
It's at the base of a cliff.
And I couldn't get over that, but I could see it.
He screwed up, though.
His arrogance, I think, got to him.
Well, yeah, I think he just, you only need to make one little screw-up.
It's like the Israeli army.
You only have to lose one war.
That's right.
You know, the other guys can lose them all.
They don't have to win one.
Now, you mentioned Cook.
Do you have personal heroes?
Cook.
I have his journals.
Do you have the books, the art of Captain Cook's Voyager?
Yeah, I have that.
It reminds me of a lot of stories.
Marco Polo.
I love the travels of Marco Polo.
How he could move 30 miles and go from heaven to hell, and then back to heaven.
How the world was so, so many worlds back then that were insulated, and you could have, you know, sort of the classic sand,
The best form of government is a benevolent dictator, and the worst form is a non-venevilent dictator.
I mean, you could just see this.
The travels of Marco Polo were just fascinating.
Think about Captain Nemo, naturally.
As a child, that was my real hero.
That was my fantasy.
So the blood of exploration is always coursed through your veins, then?
Well, I think it might be in the genes.
My family came to America in 1635.
And they settled in Virginia, in Williamsburg, and they migrated across the United States.
My grandfather was killed in a gunfight.
He was a marshal of Wichita, Kansas.
He was killed in William Ballard.
He was killed in 1920 in a gunfight, and he's buried in Wichita.
My father was a cowboy.
After his mother died, he was orphaned, and he was shipped out to the homesteads.
He grew up in Montana.
and was a cowboy, was Chester Ballard.
And then he went on to become chief engineer of the Minute Man missile program.
So he really was the one that made the big move.
My brother and I are the first in our family to ever go to college and graduate.
All the rest were, for 110 years we were Quakers in North Carolina.
So we've been on the move and constantly, I think, I just say that
My family landed in 1635, walked across America, arrived at the Pacific, and I kept walking.
And so I feel that it's part of my genetic heritage to be on the move, to explore.
But you started out in the Army.
That's kind of a— Well, that's because they didn't offer anything else.
Where I went to school, I was at UC Santa Barbara, and it was mandatory military service, but they only had the Army.
They had no choice.
That's pretty cool that they transferred your commission, though.
Well, I was getting a PhD in oceanography.
They were a little enlightened.
I mean, Vietnam was a funny time.
Mostly, it didn't work.
And for me, I don't know why, some computer made a mistake and did the right thing.
and put me into deep submergence and sent me to Woods Hole.
It's like coming home, isn't it, for you?
Did you know instantly that this is a— When I arrived—well, initially it was a culture shock for me.
I'd never been east of the Mississippi, and I was a Westerner.
And Westerners are Westerners, and it's a huge difference.
Yeah, but it's amazing how many kids that I went to OCS with down in Newport.
I mean, the most fervent—I mean, the ones who probably went career are the guys from the Midwest, Oklahoma.
Oh, yeah.
Mid-Westerners for the Navy and Southerners for the Army.
I remember my first skipper in the carrier, Jack Kenyoner, from Oklahoma.
I mean, it's amazing how they— Well, it was fascinating.
The other night I was doing the Jim Bohanna Show, which is a Larry King mutual radio network throughout the United States.
And it was a two-hour thing.
And the phone-ins, and every person that called in was from the Midwest.
Yeah.
They just can't believe there's emotion.
Well, it's just fascination.
It is the lure.
You also correct this point of view.
As beautifully and as mesmerizing as it is, it's also very unforgiving.
Very unforgiving.
It has no conscience.
It kills it just, boom.
Without a thought.
It can be gorgeous within five seconds.
And then the fish will come in and eat you very sweetly.
Very sweetly.
And they'll say thank you.
But when you got into the submersible rules on the project, did you sense that this was going to be a career of exploration, or was it really more or less professional and scientific kind of a thing?
I wanted to be an explorer, and it was a bad word in the scientific world, to be an explorer.
It was kind of a chivalric, a non-professional kind of thing.
Playing romantic was unprofessional.
And there's this clinicalness to it.
But I was a romantic.
I still am.
And I just think in the epic journey.
I mean, my view of life is the epic journey.
It's sort of like Joseph Campbell who said, life is the act of becoming.
You never arrive.
And I look at this journey as synonymous with life.
To go out and do what I do is to...
do what life's all about, and that is to dream.
I'm a dreamer.
I'm always dreaming of things to do.
I always, as a kid, was a dreamer.
And then the dreams led to certain consequences, that if you're going to live your dream, then the next phase is to prepare yourself.
So I wanted to be an explorer from day one, and I wanted to be an ocean explorer, and so I said, well,
Who's the closest to being that?
They were basically cartographers, geographers.
I mean, explorers are fundamentally into the geography of things, and they're navigators and that.
So my father had a boat, so I was into navigation, and I was always interested in the bottom of the ocean.
Whenever I was a kid, I'd hold my breath and I'd go down.
As long as I could, I'd hold it.
But then I began scuba diving, and I just, and I'd go down to the bottom.
I wasn't interested in water, per se.
I'm not interested in nauticalness.
I'm not really interested in sailing.
My wife grew up in Connecticut as a sailor, and she said, you should love sailing.
I said, yeah, it's okay, but it's boring up here.
I want to get down there.
And so I was always fascinated with mountain ranges.
I grew up in mountain ranges out on the West Coast.
The Rocky Mountains are just breathtaking.
Sierra Nevada is such a...
complexity to a mountain range.
If you're out in the Great Plains, it's nothingness for miles.
In a mountain, every few inches it changes.
There's something about mountains that are just really adventurous, wonderful places.
Tell me about the mountains down below.
Yeah, and then I heard as a kid there was a piece of artwork I saw very early in my life of the ocean drained.
And there was this gigantic mountain range, and there was this big fish.
I still have that picture, actually, in my trunk somewhere.
But it shows a big fish sort of stranded on the land.
You know, it's been stranded.
But these people are hiking, literally with backpacks, and they're hiking across the ocean floor, and these incredible mountain ranges and canyons.
And I have always carried that mental picture with me of this great mountain ranges.
The biggest mountain ranges on Earth are under the ocean.
And are they, in fact, mountains?
Oh, they're gigantic.
I mean, they would look... They'd take them out of the water, and they'd look just like mountains here.
Yeah.
Well, they won't have trees on them, but they'll have... They'll have Billy Coates here.
You know, they'll smell.
That's true scale.
That's not an exaggeration.
And that mountain range is 23% of the Earth.
I mean, like a quarter of the planet.
And yet, Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong went to the moon before we went to that mountain.
That's amazing.
I mean, I think we had pretty well— They played golf on the moon before we went to the biggest mountain.
That's a good line.
And we had charted the far side of the moon, and we have pretty good— Maps.
I mean, they landed and played golf.
They were out there going— And we hadn't even been to the biggest mountain ranges on Earth.
Well, maybe it wasn't sexy enough.
You know, maybe it— Oh, I think we are definitely terrestrial beasts.
the ocean still scares people.
Now, in terms of prioritizing the most exciting and also the most important, clearly the highlight, the great celebrity has got to be this Titanic thing.
I think you're more excited by these volcanoes.
Yeah, hydrothermal vents and creatures.
Going into this mountain range
Plus, I did all of that before the Titanic.
So that was my youthfulness, my virginity, was spent in the mountain ranges.
And what I have been able to do is I can visualize.
When I look at a map, I see it in three dimensions.
It's just very useful.
It's a skill that I don't know whether I developed or I always had.
But when I'm diving, I can integrate all of what I see and build a mental image, and then work within that mental image.
And so when I look out at the ocean, I don't see the water.
I'm seeing the mountain ranges.
The canyon's over there, and there's a big thing over there, and we'll go down into that valley.
And so I'm sort of looking at it as if I'm in a helicopter.
And then I go and I... People say, what's it like?
I say, it's like exploring the Rocky Mountains at night in a snowstorm in a helicopter with a flashlight.
That's basically it.
So there's a lot of... Another thing that's really interesting, now that we've moved away from physical presence to telepresence, which I find superior.
My next question.
I actually find it better.
And the reason is... Well, it's safer too, but...
You go through the same, when you almost lose your robot, boy, your stomach bottom falls out.
But the thing about these new robotic systems is that they can give you so much information, you can build a better image than you can looking out the window.
You have so much more information at your fingertips as you're building this thing in your mind.
Yes, you've got the windows, but you've got
another view of yourself.
You have a vehicle looking at you.
This picture, for example, of Jason on the bottom working was taken by Medea.
So you have what Jason sees, and then you have what Medea sees.
So when you're in this control room— You have wind indicators, you have maps, you have so much data that
And your anxiety level is, and you're uncomfortable, you're not, I mean, in a submarine you're really banging your head and you're doing, this is how you are in a submarine.
And you're doing that, you know, and that just really cuts in on your ability to sense where you are and what you are.
I had a couple of questions.
And again, this is, I'm not going to make any comparisons with Sagan and outer space per se, but
Some of the questions are interesting.
He's a little bit older than you, but I could say, what do you expect to see in your lifetime, realistically?
And he talks about the Big Bang, hoping perhaps to have some kind of confirmation.
You know, you get it yourself.
You're a young guy.
You're still going to work at Woods Hole for another couple of years, and you're going to spend many fruitful years now in Mystic, which we will want to give a mention.
Right, right.
I know the work is spectacular, and you're committed to it, but what do you hope?
I really got bit on marine archaeology.
I am just fascinated by the amount of history that's in the ocean, preserved, well preserved.
There's more history.
preserved in the deep sea than all the museums of the world combined.
And when we talk about history, we assume the recording of human events.
Human history, human events.
You're talking about man-made things that are documented.
I'm moving away, I think, you know, plate tectonic.
I mean, there was a period of time in the early part of my career when we were primitive, we were stone-aged on what we knew about the earth.
I mean, when I was a
In college, we didn't know the average up the ocean.
We didn't know anything about plate tectonics.
We believed in all this gobbledygook, the Marshall case, geostynclinal cycle, which was like memorizing some Masonic chant, you know, that was just sort of nonsensical.
And all of a sudden, someone gave us the Rosetta Stone.
Someone came in and all of a sudden, everything fell into place.
And we went from a primitive understanding of the earth to a very sophisticated understanding.
And that was very exciting.
But it stuck in that excitement phase.
I mean, I like to move far in thinking as opposed to this.
incremental inch of the time which I think that's wonderful the people that do that it's just great but can you be a little bit specific about well we went from such a poor understanding of the earth to an incredibly good understanding then you saw that you could make comparable moves in other arenas I mean if you're an explorer you're not bound up to the subject matter
I don't feel uncomfortable moving from geology to biology to maritime history to archaeology.
Now, other people will feel uncomfortable with me doing that or getting into children's education.
I mean, it's an adventure.
And an adventure is a specific process.
And so what's really... I'm more interested in the adventure than necessarily...
where I'm going.
Could you mention specifically in terms of archaeology?
Well, if you look, for example, what if you were the representative of the premier archaeological community and I were to say, you know, I think there's a place where Bronze Age ships with their people and contents have been mummified.
Are you talking hypothetically?
No, I believe it.
And they go,
I mean, it's like that ice man that hatched out in Switzerland.
Wow.
The Black Sea.
We haven't been able to get into the Black Sea because of the Cold War.
The Russians roughed this up.
It was their puddle of water, and you'd go in there, and they were going to make your life miserable and dead.
But now that that's gone, the Black Sea is where Jason and the Argonauts went on their quest for the Golden Fleece.
The Golden Fleece was actually in Soviet Georgia.
where they used a sheepskin.
They would take a sheepskin and weight it down with stones and pan for gold in the rivers.
And the gold flecks, the fine gold flecks, would be trapped in the fleece.
So he was on a raiding part.
He was after gold.
That's pure and simple.
But his journey took him up through the Bosporus, along the northern coast of Turkey, up to Soviet Georgia, and then he escaped
going straight across and up through the Danube, because they blocked him from getting out at the Bospa, so he had to go up the Danube and come back down to Macedonia.
But anyway, that was 2000 B.C.
The interesting thing about the Black Sea is that it's shaped like a bathtub.
You go off the Crimea and it drops very quickly to 7,000 feet, and it's pretty much a flat bottom sea.
It's down to 7,000, 6,000, 7,000 feet.
Below 600 feet, it's dead.
It has no oxygen, nor has ever had oxygen through recorded history.
And so I've been working with Harvard for the last two years.
No animals to eat anything?
Nothing.
Zero.
Zip.
There should be.
There should be encapsulated late Bronze Age ships with the people draped over the oars.
That's exciting.
That's very exciting.
And to be able to... It's not just a pipe dream.
No, it should be statistically high probability, a very high statistical probability.
And ships sink all the time.
All the time, 1% in the deep sea.
Maybe more then, too, probably.
Well, maybe even more then, but the thing we're doing this summer on the Mediterranean is a warm-up.
I'm practicing, actually.
Have you got the permissions and stuff?
Don't need it.
It's high seas.
It was always the high seas, it's just whether they were going to be rough or not.
Be hospitable.
Yeah, it's always the high seas.
Anything beyond twelve miles is the high seas, so hundreds of miles across.
But the thing we're doing this summer along the ancient Roman trade routes was this incredible submarine.
This is Nemo's sub.
There is one.
There's this one.
This is as close as you're going to get to Captain Nemo's sub.
this guy it's unbelievable it's only 130 feet long it carries a crew of 11 and two scientists it has windows it has wheels and it has a nuclear power plant it stays down a month and you can just and so I'm going back to this place where I already know there are wrecks at the ISIS site where I found this Roman ship
This is the one I found.
This is actually the moment we found it.
But this is Isis.
This is the Roman ship.
This is the top part of the galley.
How did you determine the name Isis, by the way?
The archaeologist picked it out of the hat.
Isis was the goddess of good luck for sailors.
Not so much for these guys.
But in this area where we found Isis, we found an area of 20 square miles of ancient wreckage, and we recovered...
We recovered selected samples, and we have now analyzed all those samples, and it spans six centuries, from 200 B.C.
to 400 A.D., and the team of archaeologists think that there's at least six other ships right around this area.
So that's where we're going.
And then we'll go to the Black Sea the next year.
All this data was being collected.
Who's writing this up?
Oh, all of us.
I mean, it's all split up.
on your specialty.
Anna McCann, who's the project archaeologist, just published a beautiful book on all this called Deepwater Archaeology, and it talks about ISIS, and it talks about the debris field, and it predicts these six ships.
And so we're going into that area in July, September, August, September, and map the whole 20 square miles.
Now when you moved to Mystic in 97, I guess it is,
Ninety-seven, right.
I've created this new institute.
Tell me about that and what you'll be doing there.
All right, well, basically what has happened is I've been at Woods Hole thirty years.
And, you know, it's time to move on.
By as wonderful as it is.
It's okay, but Woods Hole is still committed to its primary objectives—graduate research with MIT.
and basic research in the fundamentals of the ocean.
And I did that for 30 years, and I've lost my interest in that.
I haven't lost interest.
Other things have become more interesting to me.
Pre-college education has become more interesting to me than graduate education, the whole Jason project.
And social sciences have become more interesting to me than physical sciences.
And so I needed a new home.
Plus, I'm very interested in public education.
The public's illiterate about the oceans.
There is no exhibition.
You almost put a period in your literature.
A lot of that.
I'm not asking for your comments.
Well, there are no major exhibitions in the world that deal with the deep sea.
Now, the public sees aquariums.
They see fish, and they see light, and they think the ocean is.
100 feet deep.
That's it.
They don't realize that most of the planet is in darkness.
What a great idea.
And so that whole thing with Connecticut was the governor wanted me to build this exhibition center.
So he gave us $30 million.
And we have to raise this other $15 million.
They've got half of it.
That's $45 million.
And it will open in the spring of 1998.
And you will make a simulated dive to 12,000 feet and visit the mountain ranges, visit the Idrisomal Benz.
visit the Titanic, visit archaeology.
And that'll be a wonderful experience.
It'll be a half-an-hour, 45-minute experience for people.
And it also provides me with funding for my team.
See, I've been on soft money for 30 years.
Absolutely no hard money support.
And this exhibition center will help support my team so that I can mount expeditions.
I love that mystic aquarium.
My wife and I, we love aquarium.
Well, I grew up in it.
I trained dolphins when I was in graduate school.
They have a nice attitude there.
It is not just inside looking at fish.
No.
And they obviously have extended their arms to me.
And it's really nice.
You might even attract as many people as the casino.
You never know.
But we'll certainly attract a bunch.
But the idea is that that will be sort of my home base for my expedition.
You're going to move down there?
Yep.
Probably in two years.
But that's also where this submarine's based, at Groton.
So everything's right there.
And so we begin this summer with our first adventure.
And we also are developing an excavation capability with a nuclear submarine so it can excavate.
No one has ever done a deep water excavation.
And what would that involve?
Pumping HUD, the length of the sub, and then documenting electronically everything in a three-dimensional reference plane.
So we're going to practice that next year.
Harvard's building us a whole bunch of artifacts.
Remember that Glomar Explorer?
Oh, yeah?
Was that a primitive attempt at excavation?
Well, that was raising.
That was lifting.
Well, they were going to take the whole sub up.
Yeah, they lifted.
They couldn't excavate.
They just grew forth.
They blew it.
They claimed they blew it.
They did, actually.
They blew it.
They only got the front half, or the front third.
So they didn't get the encrypting machines and all the stuff they really wanted.
They got a guy holding onto a code book.
That's fine.
This lieutenant laying in his bunk, holding on, clutching this journal that had a lot of information.
I don't know if it's worth a billion dollars.
It was a billion or something.
I just think that I can make a... Where do you make... You know, you always say, where can you make a contribution?
Where's the best... Sort of like you, you say, well, I'd rather write for someone where I have a bigger outlet.
You know, if my job is to get things out, naturally you want to have as broad an outlet as you can.
You want to maximize your energy.
And so I look and say, well, you know, I could go on doing a lot of things, but what do I...
where could I really make a contribution?
And I think I can really make a contribution.
And so, plus it's challenging, it's new, it'll cause me to learn.
I'm learning a lot.
Isn't it wonderful to have a profession that causes you to learn?
It causes you to learn and that you love doing.
Yeah.
I mean, I sit in my library now, reading the Punic Wars, you know, and the Battle of Salamis, and the Battle of Ignomus, and the Battle of Actium, and
And I want to do all of those.
But I'm sitting there just reading.
This is how it starts then.
You go and you read these stories.
They're great stories.
They're pretty accurate, aren't they?
Oh, and they're very good.
But the whole key is to take a good story that's already a good story and then add to it.
And then you get to tell the whole story all over again.
I mean, if you look at the books I've written, you know, I went out and added a final chapter, but then I got to tell the whole story all over again.
The Titanic's a great story.
The Bismarck's a great story.
The Lusitania is a great story.
Well, you went out trying—there was kind of a political edge to the Lusitania thing.
Well, I wanted to— Did you actually prove that as soon as I put anything like that?
I just figured I could prove it one way or the other.
You feel that you did?
Oh, God, yes.
And what was there about the wreck that documented that for you?
Well, the magazine didn't explode.
We were able to go out, because of the technology, and we were able to go out with the detailed engineering drawings of the ship on a CAT scan, on AutoCAD, on AutoCAD.
So we had the whole engineering drawings of the ship on a computer.
We then went out, and because we could track our robot so precisely, we can track our sensors
on our robots, ten times a second to a centimeter.
So we were able to go out and create a three-dimensional form of the Lusitania as it now rests on the bottom.
We were able then to superimpose and skew the engineering drawings, the fit, because the Lusitania jackknife is broken right from the same place Titanic broke.
It seems to be a common weakness.
And so the Lusitania on the bottom is sort of shaped like a banana.
And we were able to take all the engineering drawings and shape them and put them on that ship.
Did they have expansion joints on those, like they have with carriers?
Yeah, yeah.
So that's probably what it is.
Oh, yeah.
Well, Titanic had expansion joints.
But anyway, the point is that we now knew within a centimeter where the magazine was.
And we were then able to go down, and because the magazine was up in the bow, even though the ship was laying on the starboard side where the torpedo hit, we could get in underneath.
Because it was off the bottom.
The magazine was lifted off the bottom.
So we could go in underneath with robots and completely map and visually inspect the entire magazine.
That was fine.
Absolutely nothing happened to it.
The whole conspiracy theory was that the torpedo hit the magazine and the magazine exploded.
We have gorgeous pictures of an intact magazine.
So forget that.
And so you're only left with two other possibilities, coal dust explosion and boiler explosion.
Well, there were people in all the boilers that survived and said the boilers didn't explode while they were standing next to them.
Yeah, you have eyewitness accounts that were leaning on the boilers and said that one didn't explode, and you had them from all three boiler rooms.
The fourth boiler room was turned off.
Amazing the discovery of that boiler from Titanic.
Yeah.
I mean, that was just bingo.
And we went over that.
It was like Titanic.
It was like a big sign.
It's just approaching.
The whole concept of the debris field.
Yeah.
Well, that was the strategy that made it work.
See, everyone else had tried these other ways.
And it was because of the thresher and scorpion when I was trying to map the thresher.
And I couldn't get closure.
Because I just had this simple view that it was just a circle.
I didn't think about it, because I'd never done one before.
And so then I was just going to get closure on the circles.
I said, see, the Navy wanted 100% coverage.
So I said, okay.
So I began doing the systematic coverage, and then I couldn't get, this is going on for a long time.
Went out over a mile.
And then I looked at the size of the particles, and just the physics kicked in.
Of course.
You know, when I was at OCS in the late 60s, I knew all about SOSUS and this.
I didn't realize that this Thresher thing was hurt and everything.
It must have been this cataclysm weapon.
Oh, yeah.
Well, Scorpion, because the Thresher, they knew where it was, because they had a ship, an ASR, sitting on top of it.
But the Scorpion vanished on War Patrol.
And so they had to look at the SOSUS data and triangulate, and bingo, there it was.
I read something.
They really cost everything that was spent for that SOSUS.
I read in the New York Times and maybe some peacetime application.
Oh, whale.
All of a sudden, they've been able to show that there's more whales than we thought.
They're great for monitoring whales.
I don't know if it's worth that much money.
Well, it's a whale.
It's there, and it's a question of maintenance.
I know it's the CIA.
Well, this is, I think... Stuff for mammograms.
Right, the software for mammograms.
Yeah, it makes sense, doesn't it?
Why not?
Image processing.
It's too bad.
Well, and here's the Navy letting us use the NR-1.
That's great.
So I think, too, that one of the reasons the Navy lets us do these things is because we push the technology.
We're not satisfied.
They say, well, I've got this sonar, and I say, well, let's push it to its limits.
Whereas another guy says they just use it to say whether this is a Soviet sub or not, and it's sort of yes or no.
And we're trying to push these sensor systems way beyond what they were designed to do.
Let's do two things and then we can wrap it up.
Okay.
Maybe three things.
I read one piece where—and I didn't know that you would have to say, actually, like, this was a lot of this.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, was it— Well, National Geographic—
They didn't want to necessarily say they were looking for the monster.
So they developed a program to document the phenomena.
And they came to me and said, would I help out in mapping the lock?
And wouldn't it be great if?
Yeah, I thought, well, yeah.
Well, they offered to fly my wife and I over to Scotland, and they rented a castle, and they made it worthwhile.
And so I said, sure.
So I went back and looked at the databases.
And the only database they had on the lock was lead line soundings done by John Murray.
And John Murray was very famous, or John Murray, from the Challenger expedition.
And he'd gone into Loch Ness, and he'd done a systematic lead line sounding.
And he had maybe 700 lead line soundings.
And that's what I started with.
So I went in, and I figured that I knew the lock was there.
So my job wasn't to look for the monster.
My job was to map the lock and then superimpose
observations over that and see if it made any sense.
So I went in with a ship.
I brought in a ship, and we systematically mapped, echo sounding, and I drew this bathymetric map of the lock.
In the first place, the lock is a U-shaped, it used to be a V-shaped.
It's on a great fault, the Great Glen Fault.
And that was caused by the closing of the Atlantic Ocean, and then there was this big fault created.
And then during the Ice Age, the glaciers followed that fault and gouged it out and made this U-shape.
So Loch Ness is basically like that.
So it's solid rock.
There's very little sediments in Loch Ness.
So I said, well, look, there's no sediments in Loch Ness.
The water is saturating calcium carbonate.
There's got to be bones.
If you can't get the one that's alive, you've got to get its mom and dad.
And so if you look at—the first sighting was 1525.
Well, there's got to be—this can't be the same guy.
I mean, first place, if the Loch Ness Monster exists, then it's going to obey the laws of physics.
It's not going to have some special law, so it's going to obey everyone else.
To have one—if you talk to populationists about creatures—to have one Loch Ness Monster, you have 25.
at least, to sustain the population.
You can't just have one.
So, if there's 25 of them, at least, minimum, at any one time, and they've been around since 1525, there's a lot of dead monsters down there.
So I said, I'm going to dredge the length of Loch Ness, dredge it, and try to get bones.
And I got all sorts of crap.
I got everything you could think of but monster bones.
And so...
Right away I said, you know, that can't be.
But this was fun.
It was fun.
It was a detective story.
I mean, you had to make a first—it's like science, you make assumptions.
You must have gone in with expecting—this is one of those things where you're basically expecting not to find anything.
Well, I just said, look, a scientist, a good scientist, has no vested interest in the answer.
You don't carry baggage.
You just want to know the answer.
You don't care what it is.
And an explorer doesn't have a care—
He doesn't want to shape it.
He just doesn't have a change, just what is.
And so if you look at it that way, like, you know, I don't care if it exists, it exists.
If it doesn't, it doesn't.
I just want to know the truth.
And so I don't care.
If I drag up this femur bone, hey, great.
You know, won't that be great?
I'll probably be the only person who really has real proof.
And if I don't, I don't.
And so, yeah, I had a great summer, and I walked away saying...
You know who else worked on that and I interviewed him?
Doc Edgerton.
Yeah.
And he took a picture.
I think he may have believed in it.
I didn't.
When I walked away from it, I went in there neutral and walked away saying it.
In fact, I did a fun thing there.
It was really fun.
I made monsters of sightings.
There was a camp, a campsite.
And because the block was steep walled, if you drove your boat just right
On a nice day, you could create a wake, and the wake would go out, bounce off the wall, come back, and now you've been gone a half an hour.
And you'll get a standing wave that comes in, and you get an interference pattern.
For a few minutes, you'll have three humps.
And then it disappears.
And the siding phone started ringing.
And I would purposely go down and create these things.
And then all the phone calls would come.
You may even have the answer right there.
I think there's certainly a very reason.
Because we were able to make a three-humped monster that could sustain itself for about a minute.
And it looked pretty... And there was no obvious reason, because the ship had long gone.
Because it took that long for the wake to go all the way out, bound.
You've got this enclosed body.
Yeah.
So I walked away saying, I think that's the monster.
And just quickly, you did mention it earlier about this concept of telepresence.
Well, I think we're going to do it from a house.
I'm convinced that in about ten years Hertz will rent robots on the information highway, and you will travel electronically from your house, and you will think you're there.
you'll have such an incredibly good... Satan perceives the same thing in the heavens, by the way.
Well, I think it's only logical.
See, what's really nice about Earth, as opposed to the heavens, there's nothing on Earth more than a quarter second away by hard wire.
If you wire the Earth with fiber, there's nothing more than a quarter second away.
And so, all of a sudden, you can sit in your home, and you'll have an electronic IMAX theater.
I call it the home dome.
And you'll sit there and you'll rent robots.
For an hour, you go to the Serengeti.
Then Janie will want to go somewhere else, so you go to the Louvre.
And then you'll go to the Titanic.
That's why I wanted it to be preserved, because I felt people would visit it, like the Arizona.
I just—you go to the Galapagos Islands.
How about the Mary Rose?
That was where— A mistake, as far as raising it.
Really?
Yeah, now they're just stuck with trying to keep it wet.
I don't believe in raising wooden ships.
So that should have been your view?
Margaret Rule is a wonderful person, but I think that if you properly protect a spot, you can make it, you know, visit it where it is.
I think Gettysburg is more compelling than Gettysburg.
I think walking the battlefield of the Little Bighorn and seeing where they buried the soldiers where they fell,
to walk through where Bantene dug in and Reno tried to repel the Indians and how just a short amount of topography blocked their visual view of Custer, the terrain there where he couldn't really run, he had to dismount, and it was really hard to get through that Badlands terrain.
To walk that battlefield and read about it, then it came to life.
And this whole concept of telepresence does make these in situ museums
Very, very... That's why I'm going out to Titanic's sister this summer.
Titanic had two sisters, the Olympic and the Gigantic.
And they renamed the Gigantic because it was a little... They were embarrassed after the Titanic, so they renamed it the Britannic.
And it was sunk by the Germans during the Battle of Gallipoli.
It was on its way to the Bosporus, and it was sunk by a German... They don't know whether it was a mine or you will, but it was sunk off Greece.
And it's intact...
It's the largest luxury liner on the bottom.
It's completely intact, and nothing's been taken from it.
And only Cousteau has seen it.
He's the only person that's seen it.
And so we're going to go in, and we're going to map it.
But the thing about that is it's four miles from shore.
And he's the only one that's seen it?
Well, he and his crew.
They've only been visited once.
Why?
The others don't know where it is.
No.
I don't know.
It's deep.
It's 400 feet, so it's beyond normal depths.
I don't know, but I'm going to spend the summer on it.
We're going to map it.
We're going to do a beautiful color mosaic.
But here's the point.
Four miles from shore means I could lay a cable to it, put robots on it, and you could visit it.
So it's a very strong candidate for an institute museum.
So is Guadalcanal.
So is Lusitania.
Lusitania is only 12 miles from shore.
So I think you're going to have Arizona's memorials underwater.
I mean, Arizona's underwater as it is.
It's right there.
It's right there, but it's underwater.
And people go to it, and they don't see anything with a little oil cloud.
But they're there.
And I think— I wonder now, are sailors' remains still there?
I mean, I wonder— And the Arizona?
I wonder about the propriety of going down and looking at their— Oh, the Arizona.
Well, I think—
I think in the Arizona's case there's probably still bodies inside.
I mean, I think there'd be some questions of propriety in the Arizona's case, wouldn't you think?
Well, but I'm saying I'm going to replicate the Arizona experience.
I see.
You don't necessarily have to go inside, although you could.
See, if you look at the Britannic, it had 500 rooms, and those rooms are sealed and anaerobic.
They should be preserved.
You should be able to go in and do maid service.
and clean them, and then access them.
Because they've been sealed.
Watertight integrity.
Well, any water goes in, the oxygen's used up, and now you only have diffusion to replace the oxygen, which is very inefficient.
So in the deep bowels of the ship, it should be anaerobic.
Wow.
Yeah.
So those would be really good candidates for museums in situ.
And the technology's there.
A fiber optic cable, four miles, is a slam dunk.
And the companies that you've formed, will they work in this?
Yeah, probably.
My Odyssey company, probably.
We're also looking at launching a cable channel called Nautica that's all water-related.
Again, what I'm trying to do is to build an infrastructure to support what I want to do so that I can have fun.
Would you inscribe this for me?
You bet.
No problem.
Good interview, thank you.